**Abstract**: 
Accident data analysis in the United Kingdom for the period 2020. The dataset is a year evaluation that was gotten from UK government open data source dataset. The data was analyzed to study the change in accident casualties between rural and urban area for the given period. The implementation was delivered using Apache Spark core and to provide inside information on the data was the use of the application libraries and functions which was imported to meet the desired objectives. One of the common libraries used was Spark SQL which helped in creating distinct and cluster tables to give meaningful information about our data

**INTRODUCTION** 
The study provided deep dive analysis into the accident dataset which was provided by the UK Transportation Department from its open source data portal. The information of the dataset included records of automobile fatalities and accidents for the year 2020. The analysis takes a close look at the records of accident casualties and severity in rural and urban area. More so, the clustering accident casualties against weather conditions and road type to see its significant impact and how to improve and promote safe driving.    Geocoding was utilized to match latitude and longitude coordinates to other dataset details like age and gender. Descriptive statistics were used to find trends in the most common day of the week for accidents, the most common month for accidents, and the most common time of day for accidents. The study also featured a graphic representation of the most common road circumstances that led to accidents, such as weather and speed limits. Because data for the years 2010 to 2020 is available, this analysis will only look at 2020.

**DATASET** 
The transportation department made the data set from the UK government open dataset source public. The accident and vehicle datasets were downloaded separately in two different csv files. Each csv file provides data that describes several fields. The accident dataset comprises 36 columns, while the vehicle dataset has 27. Both datasets also have common fields such as Accident index, Accident year, and Accident reference, which can be utilised to combine the two datasets for more in-depth research

**Vehicle Data Column Field**: 
Accident index | Accident year| Accident reference| Vehicle reference | Vehicle type| Towing and articulation| Vehicle manoeuvre| Vehicle direction from| Vehicle direction to | Vehicle location restricted lane| Junction location| Skidding and overturning| Hit object in carriageway| Vehicle leaving carriageway| Hit object off carriageway| First point of impact| Vehicle left hand drive| Journey purpose of driver| Sex of driver | Age of driver| Age band of driver| Engine capacity cc| Propulsion code | Age of vehicle | Generic make model| Driver imd decile| Driver home area type|

**Accident Data Column Fields**: 
Accident index| Accident year| Accident reference| Location easting osgr| Location northing osgr| Longitude | latitude | Police force |Number of vehicles | Date| Day of week | Local authority district| Local authority highway| Time | Road type| Speed limit | Junction detail| Junction control | Second road number| Pedestrian crossing physical facilities| Second road class| Light conditions|Weather conditions| Road surface conditions| Special conditions at site| Urban or rural area| Did police officer attend scene of accident| Number of casualties| First road class | First road number |Accident severity|

**METHODOLOGY - DATA PREPARATION **
While creating a new phyton 3 session and importing the appropriate configuration and library functions, the required csv files were uploaded into the HDFS interface via the Web console. By generating SQL context, the project used the SparkSQL package to analyse the dataset. Directly from the csv file in the HDFS directory, a new dataframe for accident dataset named accident 2020DF and vehicle dataset named vehicle 2020DF was constructed. We were able to join accident and vehicle data by building a new joined dataframe named combined df that prints a new schema and set header revealing all combined fields because both datasets have mutual fields

The accident dataframe is formed by accident severity and casualty groups. The vehicle dataframe is formed by type of vehicle and the driver’s age. After joining, the resulting values were then plotted in separate in scatter plots and a line graph.Following, our analysis of the dataset, we can conclude that using the data on a multivariate scale is likely to result in patterns showing relationships between independent variables, thus indicating a relationship between mortality rates and different accidents that may have played a causal factor when it comes to mortality rate.

**CLEANLING **
Data was prepared ahead of the major analyses to ensure that it met the study's requirements. Rather than including textual strings, all the given data variables were coded and renamed to meaningful words for better representation. For each dataset, a separate dataframe was built. Recognizing that these were incidents involving several casualties and accident severity, different records counts were discovered. No missing value was found and renaming of values into meaningful words was done on the newly joined dataframe.

The joining of dataset added the columns together. A print schema revealed 63 fields, including the primary and foreign key. Almost every field is thought to be worth looking into. The longitude and latitude fields, on the other hand, were distinct since they would be utilized to indicate the study's geographically by using PixieDust. More crucially, the longitude and latitude fields for the time and location components of each section were separated. SQL library automatically discounts missing data in its coding, it was used to make the sure the distinct values were having meaning and can be grouped into individual or clustered tables to view the count not only for the year 2020 but also across the month and using visual representations to show the charts. This would allow us to display the data in whole dataframes, with no gaps or missing numbers due to unanticipated or unavoidable circumstances.

**DATA ANALYSIS**
The core analytics started with a look at the profile of Accidents in the year 2020. SQL Spark Context was used to convert the dataframe into a table. We ran a series of quiries that revealed the overall number of casualties each day of the week, January was the month with the highest number of accidents but when clustered with number of casualties September was the month with the highest number of casualties across months, and Saturday was the day with the highest number of casualties.

**DATA EXPLORATION**
Based on the frequency of accidents and casualties by day of the week, month, speed restriction, and other parameters, the proposed solution will be to construct a table or graph to display the maximum number of casualties. This will demonstrate how frequently various accidents occur and how this varies over time. The possibilities for gaining information from driving habits, accident and fatality trends, speeding law enforcement, and so on. January was the month with the highest accident occurred with 19,120 counts followed by September count 18,885. April count 6,647 show to be the lowest accident across month. January is the start of every year and can be a time filled with lots of events and activites, people having to commute a lot and which can increase accident rate, September being the closet makes it difficult to logically reasoning with why it could have been so being it’s the end of summer and people tend to travel a lot too during the period. The peak was on Friday, and the lowest was on Sunday. Because Friday marks the beginning of the weekend and Sunday marks the end of the week and people tend to stay in and less road user, it's easy to see why the daily accident count will be greater on weekends. Accidents are commonplace in the United Kingdom. They can happen to anyone, at any moment so maybe it is time to invest in and wear a fall protection harness. The clustering of number of casualties with weekday explained via a line chart using PixieDust for visualization reported that Thursday was the day with highest casualties.

However, when the number of casualties and the severity of the accident were clustered, it was discovered that the incidence of casualties with a speed limit of 60 MPH is high across all severity levels. Toad accidents are common at 30 mph, with the majority having a serious severity rating, whereas users travelling at 70 mph have a high rate of Fatal, Serious, and Slight Severity. Increases in the speed limit will not immediately reduce the casualty rate since drivers and other road users are all influenced differently by the speed limit and are exposed to different dangers.Although there is a link between alcohol intake and accidents, it is unclear whether consumption levels cause an increase in accident rates or whether social factors (such as driving more, in socially unacceptable vehicles) have a greater impact on the number of accidents. Although other research disagrees with this finding, alcohol intake has previously been cited as a factor that increases collision rates among young individuals between the age band of 20-30 which also saw a spike in the count of accident among driver of the age group. When the data is displayed against each other, this visualisation helps people understand how speed and severity are related. The government should aim for a speed limit of 30 mph since it is a safe level of risk and gives drivers and other road users a sense of freedom. In comparison to other European countries with faster speeds, the existing speed limit of 60 mph is excessively high. Lower speed limits may not cause accidents, but they do have an impact on the number of casualties, which will be considerable if the driver has no other option

An additional layer of study aimed to depict the road type and road surface conditions fields of Accident in 2020. This will serve as a good reference point for determining how the accident map has evolved because of the pandemic. The number of accidents within the speed limits. This is related not just to the high likelihood of a junction violation in an accident, but also to the complexity of junctions because of balancing the limited available road space with the enormous number of road users. If the road type does influence accident, the density of accidents within the borders is an easy hypothesis to explore in future, because single carriageways have a speed limit of 60 mph for cars and 50 mph for cars hauling a trailer, you will always encounter slower moving road users on single carriageways, as well as cyclists. Single carriage way road type has a high accident rate among other road type like dual carriageway and roundabout. 

However, it has been suggested that a more finely tuned version of this study would provide insight into interaction effects between road type and road surface condition. The common road surface condition is dry with the highest count, we predicted that to be true because it is time you find more road users compare to raining season when the road is wet or damp and road users being most careful. The analysis of road surface condition against accident severity reported slight, serious and fatal to be at all time high on dry road surface. Wet or damp record high on serious and slight severity rate and low count on fatal which can be looked at for further analysis

The report also studied the age band of drivers and sex of driver on accident in 2020, the accident rate was highest for men, with 23.5% of all accidents involving maledrivers. The accident rate for women was 20%. These differences cannot be attributed solely to the relative number of men versus women on the roads in 2020, but are instead a function of the relative frequency of accidents per driver on any given road. Males were involved in significantly more accidents than females. This pattern is especially stark when looking at accidents by driver age bands. Given the pandemic's impact on commuting patterns, it's reasonable to suppose that the age profile of drivers involved in accidents has also altered dramatically. These findings make sense given the increased range of potential victims in commuters. Previously, commuter demographics were highly homogeneous and stable, reflective of the demographic trends in general. In 2020, many more people are commuting than ever before, age groups are becoming more disparate due to diversification, and a greater number of possibilities exist for those commuters to become victims. In this context, the age profile of drivers with the highest between the ages of 26-35 and 45-65 the second- is especially concerning because it indicates that we may be approaching a "critical mass" where accidents become more common at all skill levels

**DATA VISUALISATION**
In 2020, there were an estimated 1,460 reported road death, with four months nationwide lockdown (April to June and November). There were 115,584 overall casualities in 2020, down 25% from 2019. The number of fatalities per billion car miles decreased by 34%. Road traffic reductions in response to the Covid-19 pandemic were connected to a decrease in fatalities in 2020, when comparing police reports with death records, it is obvious that very few, if any, fatal vehivcle accidents go unreported. Hospital, survey, and compensation claims data all show a higher number of casualties than those documented in police accident statistics, implying that the police are unware of considerable number of non-fatal injuries 
